feat: v2 blog post (#2297)
biomejs/website: src/content/docs/blog/biome-v2.mdx

    dark: "@/assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-dark.png"
    alt: The brand of the project. It says "Biome, toolchain of the web"
socialImage: "@/assets/social-logo.png"
featured: true
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets"
import darkVercel from "../../../assets/sponsors/vercel-logotype-dark.png";
import lightVercel from "../../../assets/sponsors/vercel-logotype-light.png";
import darkDepot from "../../../assets/sponsors/depot-logo-horizontal-on-dark@3x.png";
import lightDepot from "../../../assets/sponsors/depot-logo-horizontal-on-light@3x.png";
import Avatar from "@/components/Avatar.astro";

We are happy to announce that Biome v2 is officially out! 🍾 Biome v2 is the _first_ JavaScript and TypeScript linter that provides
**type-aware linting rules that doesn't rely on the TypeScript compiler**! This means that you can lint your project
without necessarily installing the `typescript` package.

With this release, the [Core Contributors of the project](/internals/credits#core-contributors) want to show
to the whole community and web ecosystem that Biome is here to stay and deserves to earn its place as the next-generation toolchain for the web.

> No other tools have achieved this great milestone in such a short amount of time ([two years](/blog/annoucing-biome)) and resources. This has been possible

Reviewer: |It could be worth to fix the typo and create a redirect.

> No other tools have achieved this great milestone in such a short amount of time ([two years](/blog/annoucing-biome)) and resources. This has been possible

Author: great catch, will do

> No other tools have achieved this great milestone in such a short amount of time ([two years](/blog/annoucing-biome)) and resources. This has been possible

Author: Done!

> thanks to the companies and people who believed in the project.

Author: Should we?  I created a section specifically at the end

> thanks to the companies and people who believed in the project.

Reviewer 2: I feel they've earned it, but your call.

> 

Reviewer 2: May be good to add one more paragraph:

```suggestion

Preliminary testing shows that our [`noFloatingPromises` rule](/linter/rules/no-floating-promises/), which is based on our new type inference work, can detect floating promises in about 60% of the cases that would be detected by using `typescript-eslint`, at a fraction of the performance impact. And needless to say, we have plenty of ideas on how to improve this metric even further.

Keep in mind that your mileage may vary, as these early numbers are based on a limited set of use cases. Nevertheless, we look forward to people trying it out and reporting their experiences so that we can quickly reach a level of confidence that would be sufficient for most projects.
```

change some of the core functionalities (for the better!).

## Relevant features

Biome is packed with new features, some big and some small. We will focus on the ones that we believe are worth
mentioning. For a complete list of the new features, refer to the [web version of the changelog](/internals/changelog).

### Multi-file analysis and type inference

These two features are closely related. You can't create a type inference engine without the ability to query types imported from
other modules.

Before version 2.0, Biome lint rules could only operate on one file at a time. This brought us far, but many of the more interesting rules require information from other files too.

To accomplish this, we have added a _file scanner_ to Biome that scans all the files in your project and indexes them, similar to what an LSP service might do in your IDE.

A file scanner comes with its baggage: slowness. We acknowledge that many users chose Biome for its speed. During the beta period, users raised some concerns about how this could affect their workflow.

As for this release, the file scanner has the following characteristics:

> - It's **completely opt-in**; which means migrating from v1 to v2 won't significantly affect the performance of formatting and linting your projects.

Author: I prefer to back it up. To give you an example, Astro got a bit slower, and I believe this is caused by the use of multiple/nested ignore files, which comes out-of-box for users that enable the VCS integration

> - It's **completely opt-in**; which means migrating from v1 to v2 won't significantly affect the performance of formatting and linting your projects.

Reviewer 2: I guess we need to some proper metrics then, comparing:

* Biome 1.9.4
* Biome 2 without scanner
* Biome 2 with VCS integration enabled
* Biome 2 with type inference enabled

It would add a lot of punch to the announcement if people can see the real impact.

> - It's **completely opt-in**; which means migrating from v1 to v2 won't significantly affect the performance of formatting and linting your projects.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's probably due to the merged monorepo support, because now the light scanner is almost always enabled. That's also why I created https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues/6234

- If the VCS integration is enabled, It's designed to discover nested `.gitignore` files.

> - The **full scan** (project files and `node_modules` files) are discovered *only* when [project rules](/linter/domains#project) are enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A **full scan** (which scans all your project files **and** `node_modules`) is performed *only* when [project rules](/linter/domains#project) are enabled.
```

- Users can control the scanned files using `files.includes`, with the exception of `node_modules`.

> - Lint rules that need to collect types or query the module graph **will never be recommended**. We put speed and performance first, and users have control over the rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Lint rules that need to collect types or query the module graph **will never be recommended** outside the [`project` domain](/linter/domains/#project). We put speed and performance first, and users have control over the rules.
```

<div style={{ display: "flex", justifyContent: "center"}}>
  <a href="https://vercel.com" rel="nofollow" title="Vercel" target="_blank">
    <Image
      alt="Vercel"
      src={darkVercel}
      data-canonical-src={darkVercel.src}
      width="500"
      class="dark:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
    <Image
      alt="Vercel"
      src={lightVercel}
      data-canonical-src={lightVercel.src}
      width="500"
      class="light:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
  </a>
</div>

Special thanks to Depot, our gold sponsor, for providing the project with powerful and fast CI runners. A huge **time saver** and **reliability** booster!
<div style={{ display: "flex", justifyContent: "center"}}>
  <a href="https://depot.dev" rel="nofollow" title="Depot" target="_blank">
    <Image
      alt="Depot"
      src={lightDepot}
      data-canonical-src={lightDepot.src}
      width="500"
      class="dark:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
    <Image
      alt="Depot"
      src={darkDepot}
      data-canonical-src={darkDepot.src}
      width="500"
      class="light:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
  </a>
</div>

> Congratulations to <Avatar handle="siketyan" />, which recently became a Core Contributor of the project! Thanks to their contributions,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations to <Avatar handle="siketyan" />, who recently became a Core Contributor of the project! Thanks to their contributions,
```

> the [JetBrains extension](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22761-biome/edit) is now stable and support multiple workspaces.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the [JetBrains extension](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22761-biome) is now stable and support multiple workspaces.
```

> the [JetBrains extension](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22761-biome/edit) is now stable and supports multiple workspaces.

Author: ```suggestion
the [JetBrains extension](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22761-biome) is now stable and supports multiple workspaces.
```

TFor now, he HTML formatter only touches actual `.html` files, so it doesn't format HTML in `.vue` or `.svelte` files yet. It also won't format embedded languages like JavaScript or CSS yet. HTML's options like `attributePosition`, `bracketSameLine`, and `whitespaceSensitivity` have been implemented.

The HTML formatter is still in the experimental stage, so it will remain **disabled by default for the full 2.0 release**. At the time of writing, Biome can parse most of the Prettier's HTML test suite, and format 46/124 of them correctly. Despite not matching Prettier yet, we're pretty confident that it _should_ output adequately formatted documents without destroying anything. If you find a case where it doesn't, [please let us know](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues)!

You can enable the HTML formatter by adding the following to your config file:

```json
{
  "html": {
    "formatter": {
      "enabled": true
    }
  }
}
```

## Shout-outs

> And now, let's give credits where are due!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And now, let's give credits where credits are due!
```

      width="500"
      class="light:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
  </a>
</div>

Special thanks to Depot, our gold sponsor, for providing the project with powerful and fast CI runners. A huge **time saver** and **reliability** booster!
<div style={{ display: "flex", justifyContent: "center"}}>
  <a href="https://depot.dev" rel="nofollow" title="Depot" target="_blank">
    <Image
      alt="Depot"
      src={lightDepot}
      data-canonical-src={lightDepot.src}
      width="500"
      class="dark:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
    <Image
      alt="Depot"
      src={darkDepot}
      data-canonical-src={darkDepot.src}
      width="500"
      class="light:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
  </a>
</div>

Congratulations to <Avatar handle="siketyan" />, who recently became a Core Contributor of the project! Thanks to their contributions,
the [JetBrains extension](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22761-biome) is now stable and supports multiple workspaces.

Thanks to <Avatar handle="conaclos" /> for their massive work in implementing many features such as the Import Organizer revamping,
the new glob engine, many new linting rules.

> Thanks to <Avatar handle="arendjr" />, author of the multi-file engine (scanner and file watcher), the continuous work on the type inference, and complex internal refactors to make Biome more maintainable.

Reviewer 2: I understand you're the author of the post, so it may feel weird to include yourself in the shout-outs. I guess I wouldn't include myself either. Just wanted to mention that you absolutely deserve a shout-out for your continuous and tireless efforts in all aspects of the project! :heart:

> Props to <Avatar handle="nhedger" /> for authoring the [GitHub Action](https://github.come/biomejs/setup-biome), and [shipping](// todo link to blog post) the new version of the [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=biomejs.biome).

Reviewer 3: Nit:

```suggestion
Props to <Avatar handle="nhedger" /> for authoring the [GitHub Action](https://github.come/biomejs/setup-biome), and [shipping](// todo link to blog post) the new version of the [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=biomejs.biome).
```

Thanks to <Avatar handle="dyc3" /> for leading the work on the HTML parser and formatter. They are both very complex pieces of software, especially when it comes to matching Prettier's formatting experience.

> Last but not least, a great thanks to all our [sponsors](https://github.com/biomejs/biome#sponsors) and [contributors](/internals/credits#contributors)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Last but not least, a great thanks to all our other [sponsors](https://github.com/biomejs/biome#sponsors) and [contributors](/internals/credits#contributors) as well!
```

import lightVercel from "../../../assets/sponsors/vercel-logotype-light.png";
import darkDepot from "../../../assets/sponsors/depot-logo-horizontal-on-dark@3x.png";
import lightDepot from "../../../assets/sponsors/depot-logo-horizontal-on-light@3x.png";
import Avatar from "@/components/Avatar.astro";

We are happy to announce that Biome v2 is officially out! 🍾 Biome v2—codename: Biotype, the _first_ JavaScript and TypeScript linter that provides
**type-aware linting rules that doesn't rely on the TypeScript compiler**! This means that you can lint your project
without necessarily installing the `typescript` package.

With this release, the [Core Contributors of the project](/internals/credits#core-contributors) want to show
to the whole community and web ecosystem that Biome is here to stay and deserves to earn its place as the next-generation toolchain for the web.
No other tools have achieved this great milestone in such a short amount of time ([two years](/blog/announcing-biome)) and resources. This has been possible
thanks to the companies and people who believed in the project, with a special shoutout to [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) for sponsoring the type inference work.

> Preliminary testing shows that our [`noFloatingPromises` rule](/linter/rules/no-floating-promises/), which is based on our new type inference work, can detect floating promises in about 60% of the cases that would be detected by using `typescript-eslint`, at a fraction of the performance impact. And needless to say, we have plenty of ideas on how to improve this metric even further.

Reviewer 2: If we merge the latest improvements, we can update this one:

```suggestion
Preliminary testing shows that our [`noFloatingPromises` rule](/linter/rules/no-floating-promises/), which is based on our new type inference work, can detect floating promises in about 75% of the cases that would be detected by using `typescript-eslint`, at a fraction of the performance impact. And needless to say, we have plenty of ideas on how to improve this metric even further.
```

The Import Organizer has become an assist, but we've started using this approach for new assists too: [`useSortedKeys`](https://next.biomejs.dev/assist/actions/use-sorted-keys/) can sort keys in object literals, while [`useSortedAttributes`](https://next.biomejs.dev/assist/actions/use-sorted-attributes/) can sort attributes in JSX.

For more information about assists, see: https://next.biomejs.dev/assist/

### Improved suppressions

In addition to the `// biome-ignore` comments we already supported, we now support `// biome-ignore-all` for suppressing a lint rule or the formatter in an entire file.

We also added support for suppression ranges using `// biome-ignore-start` and `// biome-ignore-end`. Note that `// biome-ignore-end` is optional in case you want to let a range run until the end of the file.

For more information about suppressions, see: https://next.biomejs.dev/linter/#suppress-lint-rules

### HTML formatter

After several months of hard work, we are pleased to announce that the HTML formatter is now ready for users to try out and report bugs! This is a huge step towards Biome fully supporting HTML-ish templating languages used in frameworks such as Vue and Svelte.

> TFor now, he HTML formatter only touches actual `.html` files, so it doesn't format HTML in `.vue` or `.svelte` files yet. It also won't format embedded languages like JavaScript or CSS yet. HTML's options like `attributePosition`, `bracketSameLine`, and `whitespaceSensitivity` have been implemented.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For now, the HTML formatter only touches actual `.html` files, so it doesn't format HTML in `.vue` or `.svelte` files yet. It also won't format embedded languages like JavaScript or CSS yet. HTML's options like `attributePosition`, `bracketSameLine`, and `whitespaceSensitivity` have been implemented.
```

As for this release, the file scanner has the following characteristics:
- It's **completely opt-in**; which means migrating from v1 to v2 won't significantly affect the performance of formatting and linting your projects.
- If the VCS integration is enabled, the scanner is used to discover nested `.gitignore` files.
- A **full scan** (which scans all your project files **and** `node_modules`) is performed *only* when [project rules](/linter/domains#project) are enabled.
- Users can control the scanned files using `files.includes`, with the exception of `node_modules`.
- Lint rules that need to collect types or query the module graph **will never be recommended** outside the [`project` domain](/linter/domains/#project). We put speed and performance first, and users have control over the rules.

Finally, we designed the multi-file analysis with monorepos in mind. Although full monorepo support did not make it in time for the 2.0 release, we expect to deliver more on this front soon.

> ### Plugins

Author: You can use a top level suggestion with six ticks at the top and bottom

      width="500"
      class="light:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
  </a>
</div>

Special thanks to Depot, our gold sponsor, for providing the project with powerful and fast CI runners. A huge **time saver** and **reliability** booster!
<div style={{ display: "flex", justifyContent: "center"}}>
  <a href="https://depot.dev" rel="nofollow" title="Depot" target="_blank">
    <Image
      alt="Depot"
      src={lightDepot}
      data-canonical-src={lightDepot.src}
      width="500"
      class="dark:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
    <Image
      alt="Depot"
      src={darkDepot}
      data-canonical-src={darkDepot.src}
      width="500"
      class="light:sl-hidden"
      loading="eager"
    />
  </a>
</div>

Congratulations to <Avatar handle="siketyan" />, who recently became a Core Contributor of the project! Thanks to their contributions,
the [JetBrains extension](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22761-biome) is now stable and supports multiple workspaces.

Thanks to <Avatar handle="conaclos" /> for their massive work in implementing many features such as the Import Organizer revamping,
the new glob engine, many new linting rules.

> Thanks to <Avatar handle="arendjr" />, author of the multi-file engine (scanner and file watcher), the continuous work on the type inference, and complex internal refactors to make Biome more maintainable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to <Avatar handle="arendjr" /> for creating the multi-file architecture, the continuous work on the type inference, plugins, and miscellaneous improvements.
```
